Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the benzodiazepines.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to the benzodiazepines. Introduce the class and its range of actions.
The benzodiazepines are a class of drugs acting at the gamma-aminobutyric acid type
A receptor to produce a spectrum of related effects: sedation and hypnosis,
anxiolysis, anterograde amnesia, anticonvulsant action,
and centrally mediated muscle relaxation.
They are widely used in anaesthesia and critical care for premedication and
anxiolysis, for sedation during procedures and in intensive care,
as co-induction agents, for the treatment of status epilepticus,
and in alcohol withdrawal.
The class includes midazolam, the short-acting water-soluble agent we use most in
the perioperative period; diazepam and lorazepam;
and the oral agents such as temazepam. A specific competitive antagonist,
flumazenil, is available to reverse their effects.
Their favourable safety in overdose, relative to the barbiturates,
is a defining feature.
Describe their structure, and the special feature of midazolam's formulation.
The benzodiazepines share a structure of a benzene ring fused to a seven-membered
diazepine ring, with substitutions that modify potency and pharmacokinetics.
Midazolam is an imidazobenzodiazepine with a clinically useful trick of
pH-dependent ring structure: in the acidic medium of its ampoule the ring is open,
rendering it water-soluble so that it can be formulated without irritant solvents
and given painlessly; at physiological pH the ring closes,
making the molecule lipophilic so that it crosses the blood-brain barrier rapidly.
Diazepam, by contrast, is lipophilic and poorly water-soluble,
so it is formulated in propylene glycol, which causes pain and thrombophlebitis,
or as a lipid emulsion.
So midazolam's formulation neatly exploits a physicochemical property to combine
water solubility in the vial with lipid solubility in the body.
What is the mechanism of action, and how does it differ from the barbiturates?
Benzodiazepines bind to a specific benzodiazepine site on the gamma-aminobutyric
acid type A receptor, distinct from the site at which gamma-aminobutyric acid
itself binds, located between particular subunits of the receptor.
Binding enhances the affinity of the receptor for gamma-aminobutyric acid and
increases the frequency of opening of the chloride channel in response to it.
This is the key contrast with the barbiturates,
which increase the duration of channel opening.
Crucially, benzodiazepines only potentiate the action of gamma-aminobutyric acid
that is already present and cannot open the channel by themselves;
their effect therefore has a ceiling,
which is why they are far safer in overdose than the barbiturates,
whose direct channel opening has no ceiling.
Different receptor subtypes mediate the different effects — sedation,
anxiolysis and so on.
Take me through the pharmacokinetics of midazolam.
Midazolam, in its lipophilic form at body pH,
has a rapid onset and a relatively short duration after a single dose,
with recovery by redistribution.
It is metabolised in the liver by the cytochrome enzyme CYP3A4 to an active
metabolite, one-hydroxymidazolam, which is then conjugated and excreted;
the active metabolite contributes to the effect and can accumulate.
Its elimination half-life is a few hours in health.
Importantly, its context-sensitive half-time rises with prolonged infusion,
so that sedation in intensive care leads to accumulation and a prolonged recovery,
especially where hepatic metabolism is impaired or the active metabolite
accumulates in renal failure.
Its metabolism is subject to interactions through CYP3A4 — inhibitors prolong and
inducers shorten its effect.
Contrast the pharmacokinetics of diazepam and lorazepam with midazolam.
Diazepam is long-acting, metabolised to active metabolites including
desmethyldiazepam, which has a very long half-life of days and prolongs and
accumulates the effect, making diazepam unsuitable where a brief or controllable
effect is wanted.
Lorazepam is intermediate-acting and, importantly,
is metabolised directly by glucuronidation to an inactive conjugate without active
metabolites and without dependence on the oxidative cytochrome pathways,
so its handling is more predictable and it is relatively spared in hepatic
impairment and the elderly.
Midazolam is the shortest-acting of the three after a single dose.
So the choice between them turns on the desired duration and on hepatic function:
midazolam for brief perioperative use,
lorazepam where predictable handling matters,
diazepam where a long action is acceptable.
Describe their effects on the central nervous system.
Benzodiazepines produce dose-dependent central depression: anxiolysis at low doses,
then sedation, then hypnosis, though they do not reliably produce full surgical
anaesthesia alone.
They cause anterograde amnesia — impairing the formation of new memories — which is
valued for unpleasant procedures and as premedication,
midazolam being particularly effective.
They are anticonvulsant, raising the seizure threshold,
which underlies their first-line role in status epilepticus.
They produce centrally mediated skeletal muscle relaxation, useful in muscle spasm.
They modestly reduce cerebral metabolic rate and blood flow.
They have no analgesic action. And they can cause paradoxical excitation and
agitation, especially in children and the elderly.
So the central profile is a useful combination of sedation, amnesia,
anxiolysis and anticonvulsant action.
And their cardiovascular and respiratory effects?
The cardiovascular effects of benzodiazepines are modest:
a small fall in arterial pressure and systemic vascular resistance,
generally well tolerated, which is part of why they are relatively safe
haemodynamically and useful as co-induction agents in the compromised patient.
The respiratory effects are more important:
they cause dose-dependent respiratory depression,
reducing tidal volume and the response to carbon dioxide,
and they depress airway tone.
The critical point is their synergy with opioids — a benzodiazepine and an opioid
together depress respiration far more than either alone,
and this combination is a frequent cause of serious respiratory events in sedation,
particularly in the elderly and those with sleep-disordered breathing.
So respiratory depression, especially in combination, is their main acute danger.
What are the indications for benzodiazepines in anaesthesia and critical care?
They are used for premedication and anxiolysis before surgery,
midazolam being favoured for its rapid onset and amnesia;
for conscious sedation during procedures performed under local or regional
anaesthesia; as co-induction agents,
a small dose reducing the dose of the main induction agent through synergy;
for sedation of the ventilated patient in intensive care,
though this use is now restricted; for the treatment of status epilepticus,
where they are first-line; for the management of alcohol withdrawal;
for acute behavioural disturbance; and for muscle spasm.
Their versatility across sedation, amnesia,
anticonvulsant and muscle-relaxant indications makes them widely used,
within the limits set by their adverse effects.
Give the doses for the common uses of midazolam.
For conscious sedation, midazolam is titrated in small increments — commonly one to
two milligrams at a time intravenously,
with smaller doses and longer intervals in the elderly,
waiting for the effect before giving more,
since over-rapid dosing risks oversedation and respiratory depression.
For premedication it may be given orally or intravenously in a modest dose.
For status epilepticus it is given as a defined intravenous,
intramuscular or buccal dose. As a co-induction agent a small dose,
of the order of a milligram or two, is given before the main agent.
The governing principle is careful titration to effect with reduced doses in the
elderly and the compromised, because of the synergy with opioids and the risk of
respiratory depression.
What are the adverse effects of the benzodiazepines?
The principal acute adverse effect is respiratory depression,
especially in combination with opioids and in the elderly,
and oversedation with loss of airway control.
They cause paradoxical agitation and disinhibition in some patients,
particularly children and the elderly.
With prolonged use they produce tolerance,
physical dependence and a withdrawal syndrome on cessation.
In intensive care, benzodiazepine sedation is associated with delirium and with
longer duration of ventilation, which has led to a move away from them.
In the elderly they increase the risk of falls, confusion and cognitive impairment.
Used in late pregnancy or labour they can cause neonatal depression and the
floppy-infant syndrome.
So their adverse effects span the respiratory,
the neuropsychiatric and the consequences of dependence.
Why have benzodiazepines fallen out of favour for routine sedation in intensive
care?
Because accumulating evidence has linked benzodiazepine-based sedation in the
intensive care unit to worse patient-centred outcomes — a higher incidence of
delirium, longer duration of mechanical ventilation,
and longer stay — compared with non-benzodiazepine strategies.
Their long context-sensitive half-time and active,
accumulating metabolites contribute to prolonged, unpredictable sedation.
Modern critical-care sedation guidelines therefore recommend light,
targeted sedation and favour non-benzodiazepine agents such as propofol and
dexmedetomidine for most ventilated patients,
reserving benzodiazepines for specific indications such as alcohol withdrawal,
seizures, deep sedation requirements and procedural amnesia.
So their decline reflects a shift towards sedation strategies that reduce delirium
and shorten ventilation.
What are the contraindications and cautions?
They should be used with great caution, and often avoided,
in respiratory failure and severe respiratory insufficiency,
and in untreated obstructive sleep apnoea, because of respiratory depression.
They are cautioned in myasthenia gravis, where muscle relaxation is unwanted.
Severe hepatic impairment prolongs the effect of those dependent on oxidative
metabolism, so lorazepam, which is glucuronidated, may be preferred.
The elderly are highly sensitive and at risk of falls,
confusion and paradoxical reactions,
so doses are reduced and the drugs used sparingly.
They are avoided in late pregnancy and labour because of neonatal effects.
And the combination with opioids and other central depressants, including alcohol,
is a major caution because of synergistic respiratory depression.
Tell me about flumazenil.
Flumazenil is a specific competitive antagonist at the benzodiazepine site of the
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor,
which reverses the sedative and respiratory effects of benzodiazepines.
It is used to reverse benzodiazepine sedation, for instance after a procedure,
and in the diagnosis and management of benzodiazepine overdose.
Its important limitation is that its elimination half-life is shorter than that of
most benzodiazepines, so resedation can occur as the antagonist wears off,
requiring observation or repeated dosing.
It must be used with care, because it can precipitate seizures — in patients
dependent on benzodiazepines, in mixed overdoses particularly with proconvulsant
drugs, and in those taking benzodiazepines for epilepsy — so it is not given
routinely or indiscriminately.
It is a valuable but double-edged antidote.
Compare midazolam, diazepam and lorazepam, and state when you would choose each.
Midazolam is short-acting, water-soluble and painless to inject,
with rapid onset and good amnesia, making it the agent of choice for perioperative
premedication, conscious sedation and co-induction,
accepting that it accumulates with prolonged infusion.
Diazepam is long-acting with long-lived active metabolites, giving a prolonged,
less controllable effect, now used less in the perioperative period but useful
where a sustained action is acceptable.
Lorazepam is intermediate-acting with no active metabolites and glucuronide
metabolism, giving predictable handling that is relatively preserved in hepatic
impairment and the elderly, and it is a first-line agent for status epilepticus and
for situations needing a steadier, longer anxiolysis.
So I would choose midazolam for brief perioperative use,
lorazepam for predictable handling and seizures,
and diazepam where its long action suits.
Is there a recent development in this class relevant to practice?
Yes — remimazolam, a newer benzodiazepine designed as a soft drug.
It is an ultra-short-acting agent with an ester linkage,
so that it is metabolised by non-specific tissue esterases to an inactive
metabolite, independent of hepatic and renal function, giving a rapid,
predictable offset and a context-sensitive half-time that remains short even after
prolonged infusion — overcoming the accumulation that limits midazolam.
It retains the favourable cardiovascular and respiratory profile of the class and,
importantly, is reversible with flumazenil.
It is licensed for procedural sedation and, in some countries,
for general anaesthesia, and is of particular interest for the haemodynamically
fragile and for sedation where a clean, organ-independent recovery is wanted.
It represents the application of soft-drug design, as with remifentanil,
to the benzodiazepines.
Pull it together: how do you use the benzodiazepines rationally and safely?
I would use them for their genuine strengths — anxiolysis and amnesia for
premedication and procedures, synergy as co-induction agents,
first-line control of status epilepticus,
and management of alcohol withdrawal — choosing the agent by the duration required
and the patient's hepatic function, midazolam for brief use,
lorazepam for predictable handling and seizures.
I would titrate carefully to effect,
reduce doses in the elderly and the compromised,
and be especially cautious of the synergistic respiratory depression with opioids,
monitoring ventilation and having flumazenil and airway support available.
I would avoid routine benzodiazepine sedation in the ventilated intensive-care
patient because of delirium and prolonged ventilation,
reserving them for specific indications,
and I would be mindful of tolerance and dependence with prolonged use.
Used thus, they are valuable; used carelessly, particularly with opioids,
they are dangerous.
Tell me about the receptor subtypes and how they relate to the different effects.
The gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor is a pentamer assembled from various
subunits, and the particular combination determines the receptor's properties and
its sensitivity to benzodiazepines. The classical benzodiazepine site lies between
an alpha and a gamma subunit.
Different alpha subunits mediate different effects:
receptors containing the alpha-one subunit are thought to mediate the sedative,
amnesic and anticonvulsant actions,
while those containing alpha-two and alpha-three subunits mediate the anxiolytic
and muscle-relaxant actions.
This subunit basis explains why the conventional benzodiazepines,
acting non-selectively, produce the whole spectrum of effects,
and it has driven the search for subunit-selective agents that might give
anxiolysis without sedation — a goal not yet fully realised in practice.
What are inverse agonists and partial agonists at this site?
The benzodiazepine site is unusual in supporting a continuum of activity.
A full agonist, the conventional benzodiazepine,
enhances the receptor's response to gamma-aminobutyric acid.
A neutral antagonist, flumazenil, occupies the site without effect on the channel,
simply blocking the agonist.
An inverse agonist, such as the experimental beta-carbolines,
has the opposite effect to an agonist,
reducing the response to gamma-aminobutyric acid and so producing anxiety and
convulsions — a clear demonstration of inverse agonism and of constitutive receptor
behaviour.
Partial agonists produce a submaximal effect.
This pharmacology is conceptually important:
it shows that a single binding site can be modulated in either direction,
and the existence of inverse agonists is part of the evidence cited for an
endogenous modulator of the site.
Detail the pharmacokinetics that distinguish the agents,
including routes of administration.
Beyond their differing metabolism, the agents differ in route and absorption.
Midazolam is water-soluble in its ampoule and well absorbed by many routes —
intravenous, intramuscular, oral, buccal and intranasal — which makes it versatile,
particularly in children and in seizures where intravenous access is lacking;
its oral bioavailability is reduced by first-pass metabolism.
Diazepam is well absorbed orally and rectally but erratically intramuscularly
because of its lipophilicity and solvent,
and the rectal route is used for seizures. Lorazepam is given orally,
intramuscularly and intravenously and is a standard intravenous agent for status.
The buccal and intranasal routes for midazolam are a real practical advance for
treating seizures outside hospital,
and their convenience is part of why midazolam is so widely used.
Explain tolerance, dependence and the withdrawal syndrome.
With repeated use, tolerance develops to the sedative and anticonvulsant effects
through adaptive changes at the receptor,
so that higher doses are needed for the same effect,
and there is cross-tolerance with alcohol and other central depressants.
Physical and psychological dependence develop with prolonged use.
Abrupt cessation after chronic use produces a withdrawal syndrome — anxiety,
insomnia, tremor, sweating, perceptual disturbance and, in severe cases,
seizures and a confusional state — which can be dangerous and resembles alcohol
withdrawal, reflecting the shared mechanism.
Withdrawal is managed by gradual dose reduction rather than abrupt stopping,
often converting to a long-acting agent to taper.
This dependence liability is a major reason for using benzodiazepines at the lowest
dose for the shortest time, and for caution in those with a history of substance
misuse.
What is their place in the management of status epilepticus?
Benzodiazepines are the first-line drug treatment of status epilepticus,
because they rapidly terminate seizure activity through their anticonvulsant action.
The established options are intravenous lorazepam,
which is favoured for its longer duration of anticonvulsant effect,
or intravenous diazepam followed by a longer-acting anticonvulsant, or,
where there is no intravenous access, intramuscular,
buccal or intranasal midazolam, which is especially useful in the community and in
children.
A defined dose is given and may be repeated once if seizures continue,
after which second-line anticonvulsants and ultimately anaesthetic agents are used
for refractory status.
Prompt benzodiazepine administration is the key early step,
and the availability of non-intravenous midazolam has improved the early treatment
of seizures outside hospital.
How are benzodiazepines used in alcohol withdrawal?
Because benzodiazepines and alcohol act on the same gamma-aminobutyric acid system
and show cross-tolerance, benzodiazepines are the cornerstone of treating alcohol
withdrawal, preventing and treating its features — tremor, agitation,
autonomic overactivity, seizures and delirium tremens.
A longer-acting agent such as chlordiazepoxide or diazepam is commonly used,
given as a reducing regimen or titrated against the severity of withdrawal using a
structured scale, with lorazepam preferred where there is significant liver disease
because its glucuronide metabolism is more predictable.
Adequate benzodiazepine treatment prevents progression to seizures and delirium
tremens, and thiamine is given to prevent Wernicke's encephalopathy.
This is an important and effective use of the class's cross-tolerance with alcohol.
What is the floppy-infant syndrome, and what is the concern in pregnancy and labour?
Benzodiazepines cross the placenta,
and their use in late pregnancy or labour can depress the neonate,
producing the floppy-infant syndrome — hypotonia, lethargy, poor feeding,
hypothermia and respiratory depression — and, with chronic maternal use,
a neonatal withdrawal syndrome.
They are therefore avoided where possible in late pregnancy and labour.
There are also concerns about regular use in the first trimester.
For these reasons benzodiazepines are used in pregnancy only when clearly
necessary, at the lowest effective dose,
with awareness of the neonatal effects and provision for neonatal support if they
have been given near delivery.
This is part of the general caution about central depressants in the peripartum
period.
Compare benzodiazepines with the so-called Z-drugs.
The Z-drugs — zopiclone, zolpidem and related agents — are non-benzodiazepine
hypnotics that nonetheless act at the same benzodiazepine site of the
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor,
with some selectivity for the alpha-one-containing receptors that mediate sedation.
They were introduced as hypnotics with the hope of fewer of the drawbacks of the
benzodiazepines, but in practice they share much of the same profile — dependence,
tolerance, next-day impairment and, in the elderly,
falls and confusion — and are reversed by flumazenil.
So although marketed as distinct, they are best understood as
benzodiazepine-receptor agonists with similar liabilities,
and the same cautions about short-term use and avoidance in the elderly apply.
Describe the place of benzodiazepines and the alternatives in modern intensive-care
sedation guidelines.
Contemporary critical-care guidelines on pain, agitation, sedation, delirium,
immobility and sleep recommend a strategy of analgesia-first,
light and targeted sedation, with daily assessment,
and they advise against routine benzodiazepine sedation for most ventilated
patients because of its association with delirium,
longer ventilation and longer stay.
The preferred agents for routine sedation are propofol and the alpha-two agonist
dexmedetomidine, which are associated with less delirium and quicker awakening.
Benzodiazepines are reserved for specific indications — alcohol withdrawal,
status epilepticus, deep sedation when required, amnesia for procedures,
and where haemodynamic stability with the other agents is problematic.
So the guidelines represent a deliberate move away from benzodiazepine-based
sedation towards strategies that improve patient-centred outcomes.
Tell me more about remimazolam and the evidence for it.
Remimazolam is an ester-containing benzodiazepine designed as a soft drug,
metabolised by non-specific tissue esterases to an inactive carboxylic-acid
metabolite, independent of hepatic and renal function.
This gives it a rapid onset, a short and predictable offset,
and a context-sensitive half-time that stays short even after prolonged infusion,
avoiding the accumulation of midazolam.
It retains the favourable cardiovascular and respiratory profile of the class and
is fully reversible with flumazenil.
Trials support its use for procedural sedation,
where it provides reliable sedation with stable haemodynamics and rapid recovery,
and it is licensed in several countries for procedural sedation and for general
anaesthesia, with particular interest in the elderly and the haemodynamically
fragile.
It is the benzodiazepine equivalent of the soft-drug approach that gave us
remifentanil, and a genuine recent addition to practice.
What is the concern with propylene glycol in high-dose benzodiazepine infusions?
Lorazepam and diazepam for injection are formulated in propylene glycol because of
their poor water solubility.
When these agents are given by prolonged,
high-dose infusion — as may occur in refractory status epilepticus or heavy
intensive-care sedation — the propylene-glycol load can accumulate and cause
toxicity, with a metabolic acidosis, a raised osmolar gap,
and renal and central effects.
This is an additional reason, beyond the pharmacodynamic ones,
to avoid prolonged high-dose infusion of these agents,
to monitor for an unexplained acidosis and osmolar gap when they are used,
and to prefer agents without this vehicle where prolonged infusion is needed.
It is a formulation-related toxicity distinct from the drug's own effects.
How would you sedate an anxious adult for an awake regional procedure using a
benzodiazepine?
I would explain the plan, attach full monitoring including oxygenation and
capnography, give supplemental oxygen,
and ensure resuscitation equipment and flumazenil are available.
I would titrate midazolam intravenously in small increments — one to two milligrams
at a time — waiting to assess the effect before any further dose,
aiming for a calm, cooperative, rousable patient rather than deep sedation,
and reducing the doses in the elderly.
I would be especially cautious if combining it with an opioid,
because of synergistic respiratory depression,
reducing both doses and monitoring ventilation closely.
I would avoid oversedation that compromises the airway or the patient's ability to
cooperate with the regional technique. Careful titration to a light, anxiolytic,
amnesic end-point is the goal.
Summarise how the benzodiazepines' safety in overdose contrasts with the
barbiturates, and the limits of that safety.
Benzodiazepines are relatively safe in overdose because they only enhance the
action of existing gamma-aminobutyric acid and cannot open the chloride channel by
themselves, so their central depression has a ceiling — in contrast to the
barbiturates, which open the channel directly with no ceiling and readily cause
fatal respiratory and cardiovascular depression.
A pure benzodiazepine overdose therefore rarely kills a healthy adult.
The important limit to that safety is combination: with alcohol,
opioids or other central depressants the respiratory depression becomes additive or
synergistic and can be lethal, which is the usual mechanism of
benzodiazepine-related death.
So they are safe alone but dangerous in combination, and a specific antagonist,
flumazenil, exists but is used with the cautions already described.
What is the rationale for benzodiazepine premedication, and for whom is it suitable?
Benzodiazepine premedication aims to relieve preoperative anxiety,
provide a degree of sedation and produce anterograde amnesia for the unpleasant
period before induction, and it can smooth induction and reduce anaesthetic
requirements through synergy.
Midazolam is commonly used for its rapid onset and good amnesia.
It suits the anxious adult facing surgery, and selected procedures,
but it is used more selectively than in the past,
because routine sedative premedication can delay recovery and is poorly suited to
day-case and to the elderly, in whom it causes confusion,
prolonged sedation and falls.
So I would reserve it for the genuinely anxious patient,
avoid it in the elderly and in those with respiratory compromise or sleep apnoea,
and tailor the dose and timing to the individual.
Describe paediatric premedication with midazolam.
Midazolam is widely used for premedication in children to relieve anxiety and ease
separation from parents and the induction of anaesthesia,
exploiting its anxiolysis and amnesia.
It is commonly given orally, mixed to disguise its bitter taste,
some twenty to thirty minutes before induction,
and can also be given intranasally or buccally, though these routes can sting.
It produces a calm, cooperative child and amnesia for the events around induction.
The cautions are paradoxical agitation, which is not uncommon in children,
respiratory depression particularly if combined with opioids,
and the need to monitor the sedated child.
Used judiciously it greatly improves the experience of anaesthesia for an anxious
child and the family.
Detail the interactions affecting midazolam's metabolism.
Midazolam is metabolised by the cytochrome enzyme CYP3A4,
so it is subject to the interactions of that pathway,
which are clinically relevant because they alter its effect.
Inhibitors of CYP3A4 — the azole antifungals, the macrolide antibiotics,
certain antiretrovirals, and grapefruit juice — reduce its metabolism,
increasing and prolonging its sedative effect, sometimes markedly,
so doses must be reduced.
Inducers — rifampicin, the enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants — accelerate its
metabolism and reduce its effect. Because midazolam is so dependent on this single
pathway, it is a useful probe drug for CYP3A4 activity.
The practical lesson is to anticipate enhanced and prolonged sedation in patients
taking CYP3A4 inhibitors and to titrate accordingly.
What is the concern about benzodiazepines in hepatic impairment and encephalopathy?
In hepatic impairment the metabolism of benzodiazepines dependent on oxidative
cytochrome pathways, such as midazolam and diazepam, is reduced,
prolonging and intensifying their effect and risking accumulation; lorazepam,
metabolised by glucuronidation, is handled more predictably and is therefore
preferred where a benzodiazepine is needed in liver disease.
More importantly, patients with significant liver disease are sensitive to central
depressants and benzodiazepines can precipitate or worsen hepatic encephalopathy,
so they are used with great caution or avoided in such patients.
The combination of impaired metabolism and increased cerebral sensitivity means
that, where sedation is unavoidable,
the lowest dose of a predictably handled agent is used with close monitoring.
Quantify the co-induction synergy and explain its value.
Co-induction exploits the synergy between a benzodiazepine and the main induction
agent: a small dose of midazolam given before propofol substantially reduces the
dose of propofol required to induce anaesthesia,
by more than would be expected from simple addition,
because the two act synergistically on the same gamma-aminobutyric acid system.
The value is a reduction in the dose of the main agent and so in its side-effects,
particularly the hypotension of propofol,
which is useful in the cardiovascularly compromised,
together with the anxiolysis and amnesia of the benzodiazepine.
The trade-off is a contribution to respiratory depression and a possibly prolonged
recovery, so the technique is used thoughtfully,
with the doses of both agents reduced and titrated.
Beyond seizures, where is diazepam used for its muscle-relaxant action?
Diazepam's centrally mediated skeletal muscle relaxation is used in conditions of
pathological muscle spasm and spasticity. It is used in tetanus,
where severe muscle spasms and rigidity are a danger,
as part of the control of spasm alongside other measures.
It is used in spasticity of neurological origin,
and in acute muscle spasm and some movement disorders.
The relaxation is mediated centrally,
through enhanced inhibition at the spinal and supraspinal level,
not by an action at the neuromuscular junction.
The sedation that accompanies it limits the dose.
So the muscle-relaxant property, one of the class's spectrum of effects,
has specific therapeutic uses distinct from anaesthetic practice.
Give the practical detail of using flumazenil.
Flumazenil is given intravenously in small incremental doses,
titrated to the desired reversal of sedation,
since giving it slowly and to effect reduces the risk of abrupt full reversal and
of precipitating seizures or acute anxiety.
Because its elimination half-life is shorter than that of most benzodiazepines,
the patient must be observed for resedation as it wears off,
and a repeat dose or an infusion may be needed.
It is avoided, or used with great caution,
in patients dependent on benzodiazepines,
in mixed overdoses especially with proconvulsant drugs such as tricyclic
antidepressants, and in those taking benzodiazepines to control epilepsy,
in all of whom it may precipitate seizures.
So it is titrated, the patient watched for resedation,
and the contraindications respected.
Compare benzodiazepines, propofol and dexmedetomidine for sedation.
Each suits different needs. Benzodiazepines provide anxiolysis and amnesia with
modest haemodynamic effect but cause respiratory depression, accumulate,
and are associated with delirium on prolonged use.
Propofol gives rapid, titratable, clear-headed sedation with antiemesis but causes
hypotension and respiratory depression and, in prolonged high doses,
the propofol infusion syndrome.
Dexmedetomidine, an alpha-two agonist, gives a rousable,
cooperative sedation with analgesia and minimal respiratory depression but causes
bradycardia and hypotension and has a slower onset and offset.
So for brief procedural amnesia a benzodiazepine suits;
for titratable general sedation propofol;
for cooperative sedation preserving respiration,
such as awake fibreoptic intubation or where delirium must be minimised,
dexmedetomidine.
Modern intensive-care practice favours propofol and dexmedetomidine over
benzodiazepines for routine sedation.
Summarise the ideal use of a benzodiazepine and the patient in whom you would avoid
one.
I would use a benzodiazepine for genuine anxiolysis and amnesia — premedication for
the anxious patient, sedation for an unpleasant procedure,
co-induction to spare the main agent, first-line treatment of status epilepticus,
and alcohol withdrawal — choosing the agent by duration and hepatic function and
titrating to a light, rousable end-point.
I would avoid or greatly reduce them in the elderly,
in respiratory failure or untreated sleep apnoea,
in significant hepatic impairment and encephalopathy, in late pregnancy and labour,
and for routine intensive-care sedation,
and I would be most wary of combining them with opioids and other depressants
because of synergistic respiratory depression.
Used for the right indication, at the lowest dose for the shortest time,
they are valuable; used routinely or carelessly, they cause delirium,
dependence and respiratory harm.
What are the effects of benzodiazepines on intracranial and intra-ocular pressure?
Benzodiazepines modestly reduce the cerebral metabolic rate and cerebral blood
flow, and they tend to lower or not significantly raise intracranial pressure,
so they are not contraindicated on that account and are used in the
neurocritical-care setting, including for seizure control.
They also lower intra-ocular pressure. These effects are gentler than those of the
major induction agents, in keeping with the class's generally modest physiological
impact at sedative doses.
The caveat is the same as always: respiratory depression causing hypercarbia would
raise intracranial pressure, so ventilation must be maintained,
particularly in the patient with intracranial pathology in whom a rise in carbon
dioxide is dangerous.
What is their role in local-anaesthetic systemic toxicity and other drug-induced
seizures?
Benzodiazepines are the first-line drugs for controlling the seizures of
local-anaesthetic systemic toxicity,
alongside airway and circulatory support and the administration of lipid emulsion;
their rapid anticonvulsant action terminates the seizure activity,
which itself worsens the acidosis and toxicity.
More generally they are first-line for terminating most drug-induced and other
acute seizures, for the same reason that they are first-line in status epilepticus.
In the specific context of local-anaesthetic toxicity,
controlling seizures with a benzodiazepine while giving lipid emulsion and
supporting the airway and circulation is the established approach,
and benzodiazepines are preferred over agents that might further depress the
already compromised cardiovascular system.
How do benzodiazepines affect sleep, and why are they not ideal long-term hypnotics?
Benzodiazepines reduce the time to fall asleep and reduce night-time waking,
but they alter the architecture of sleep — reducing slow-wave deep sleep and
rapid-eye-movement sleep — so that the sleep they produce is not entirely natural.
With continued use, tolerance to the hypnotic effect develops, dependence forms,
and stopping causes rebound insomnia, often worse than the original complaint,
which perpetuates use. They also cause next-day sedation and impairment,
and in the elderly falls and confusion.
For these reasons they are recommended only for short-term treatment of insomnia,
at the lowest dose, with non-pharmacological measures preferred for chronic
insomnia. The same limitations apply to the Z-drugs.
So although effective acutely, they are poor long-term hypnotics.
How would you manage a pure benzodiazepine overdose?
Management is primarily supportive, because a pure benzodiazepine overdose,
owing to the ceiling on its central depression,
rarely threatens life in a healthy adult.
I would assess and support airway, breathing and circulation, give oxygen,
and monitor, observing for respiratory depression and managing it with airway
support and ventilation as needed.
Flumazenil, the specific antagonist, can reverse the sedation,
but it is used cautiously and not routinely,
because it can precipitate seizures in the benzodiazepine-dependent patient and in
mixed overdoses, particularly with proconvulsant drugs,
and because resedation occurs as it wears off;
so it is reserved for selected cases with careful observation.
The greatest danger is co-ingestion of alcohol, opioids or other depressants,
whose additive effect can cause fatal respiratory depression,
so I would actively look for and treat such combinations.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Benzodiazepines act at a specific site on the GABA-A receptor,
increasing the frequency of chloride-channel opening; they cannot open it alone,
giving a ceiling effect and relative safety in overdose (unlike barbiturates).
Second, They produce sedation, anxiolysis, anterograde amnesia,
anticonvulsant action and muscle relaxation but no analgesia;
midazolam's pH-dependent ring gives water solubility in the vial and lipophilicity
in the body.
Third, Choose by duration and hepatic function: midazolam (short,
accumulates on infusion) for perioperative use; lorazepam (glucuronidated,
no active metabolite) for predictable handling and status;
diazepam (long-acting active metabolites).
Fourth, The key danger is synergistic respiratory depression with opioids;
benzodiazepine ICU sedation is now discouraged (delirium,
prolonged ventilation) in favour of propofol/dexmedetomidine.
Fifth, Flumazenil competitively reverses them but risks resedation and seizures;
remimazolam is a new ester-metabolised, organ-independent,
flumazenil-reversible agent for sedation and anaesthesia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.